hello everyone I'm pleased to announce
my new tour for 2024 beginning in early
February and running through June Tammy
and I an assortment of special guests
are going to visit 51 cities in the US
you can find out more information about
this on my website
jordanbpeterson.com as well as accessing
all relevant ticketing information I'm
going to use the tour to walk through
some of the ideas I've been working on
my forthcoming book out November 2024 we
who wrestle with God I'm looking forward
to this I'm thrilled to be able to do it
again and I'll be pleased to see all of
you again soon
bye-bye this is where I'm most
optimistic it's what parents can do
we've known this for you know since the
beginning of Time how to raise good
people and we've done it and the way to
do it in our over with these overtreated
kids is to proceed by subtraction remove
the psych meds they don't need the
diagnosis you don't believe in the uh
over monitoring over coddling over
accommodation if you do that you will
raise good kids and you don't have to be
as afraid of the teacher in school who
doesn't share your values and you don't
have to be as terrified of social media
because your kid is
[Music]
ready
hello everyone today I'm talking to
Abigail shrier I last talked to her
about two years ago when I first when I
first reemerged on the podcast scene she
was the first person I talked to in this
new series of podcasts and she had just
published her book irreversible damage
the transgender craze seducing our
daughters so I was quite apprehensive
about talking to her because I mean
that's a hot topic now but it was like a
verboten topic at that point and I was
barely on my feet anyways we had a very
good conversation which I think
eventually YouTube took down if I
remember correctly because as you know
there's nothing that you can't talk
about less than the transgender issue
anyways Abigail has a new book coming
out bad therapy why the kids aren't
growing up which is slated for release
in early 2024 but which is available for
purchase now she moved from her concern
with the transgender phenomena and the
medical barbarism that accompanied its
hypothetical treatment to an analysis A
much broader analysis of what has gone
wrong with the therapeutic Enterprise as
such now that's that's something about
which you can talk about for a very long
time and we do in fact talk about that
for about an hour and a half on YouTube
and then peripherally for another half
an hour on the daily we plus side so you
can join us for that welcome aboard so I
think it's about two years since we
talked and if if I remember correctly
you were the first guest I had on again
after I more or less got back on my feet
and made me very nervous because you'd
written this contentious book and I was
sure that we'd
get thrashed to death by YouTube which
we did but but but what you've done is
extremely useful and it looks to me to
some degree as if the tide might be
turning and so I don't know what you
think about that maybe you could start
by telling people about your second last
book and then we can talk about your new
one which is going to be releasing
relatively soon but let's walk through
uh let's walk through your first book
and tell everybody sure thank you so
much for having me on again Jordan it's
great to be here and um so my first book
was about there sudden rise in uh
transgender identification among teen
girls we were seeing this huge rise in
it of course it was very contentious
subject matter and um I hypothesized it
was part of a social Contagion kids on
the inter you know on social media and
um talking to each other their friends
and therapists actually and deciding
they were transgender and rushing to to
start hormones and surgeries and one of
the things I learned when I interviewed
hundreds of parents as I did and at this
point I've talked to over a thousand is
first of all how much therapy kids were
getting to how much parents were relying
on therapists to not only help them with
their kids but to guide their parenting
and three I learned just how much
Mischief therapists were making because
they often made this sense of being
transgender much much worse they reified
it in these kids so then I began to
wonder what other kinds of Mischief were
therapists making with kids I see so
you're you're trying to make yourself
even more popular than you've already
being made a yeah well you know seven
years ago I started to think well I
longer than that but I suppose I said it
publicly seven years ago I started to
think that the universities were doing
more harm than good you know and that's
a hell of a thing to think after you've
spent 25 years at top tier universities
trying to provide people with a genuine
education and now I certainly I
certainly believe the universities are
doing more harm than good and I mean we
saw a spectacular example of that in DC
last week which was I thought when I
watched that clip of
the MIT upen and Harvard presidents that
it was the worst thing I'd seen on the
news in my life you know it just that
Glimpse that it gave everyone into this
bottomless pit of victim victimizer
false moral narrative and its
unbelievably simple-minded and
pernicious effects stunning but you know
I have thought too increasingly in
recent years that
therapy does more harm now than it does
good and I think the reason for that is
that you know when I was at Mill in the
80s and then through most of my career
the clinical psychologists I knew were
it was hard to become a clinical
psychologist and they were well trained
they were scientifically trained and
they were careful and methodical
especially the behaviorists you know and
the psychoanalysts they were rare and
generally extremely intelligent and more
creative and open and so I thought the
therapeutic Enterprise was a pretty
admirable
um was pretty admirable and I really
enjoyed being a clinician but the whole
field got invaded by people who have no
nowhere near the intelligence or the
wisdom to be doing what they're doing
the sort of naive social worker types
who are ideology addled to the nth
degree and I I work I had a colleague at
Harvard Richard McNelly who was very
concerned about the instilling of false
Memories by foolish therapists that
started to become a real issue in the
1990s and you know and it was all a
consequence of therapists who had one
theory about pathology insisting that it
explained absolutely everything in the
universe of moral striving let's say and
that that weakness that was obvious
there has just magnified itself
tremendously so tell so this is my fear
and my shame for that matter tell me
what so you broadened out from your
concern the concern you started to
develop in relationship to the trans
phenomenon per se so let's tell me more
about what you saw there in terms of the
therapist's facilitating these identity
disorders tell me why you became curious
about that generalization and then most
painfully of all explain what you
discovered sure so in in in researching
bad therapy I first of all I started out
with a totally different hypothesis I
knew that we were these kids were
getting more mental health intervention
than any generation prior the rising
generation I knew that they were getting
more diagnosis and more psych meds and
more therapeutic intervention in schools
but I still didn't think therapy was
necessarily the problem because while
40% of them were getting therapy it
still wasn't a majority and yet we'd
seen their mental health fall apart we
knew that the rise in therapy and
therapeutic intervention was somehow
coinciding with worse mental health that
that of course shouldn't be the case
like with breast cancer you know more
access more treatment uh better
treatment and more access to it has seen
you know rates of death from breast
cancer plummet and that's what we would
expect to see with mental health and
we're not seeing that but I still
thought you know it was possibly just uh
the way kids were being raised maybe
they were being raised differently or
perhaps it was just a smartphone um and
then I began to look into what the
iatrogenic effects of therapy are what
are the what are the ways that therapy
can hurt you and there's a literature on
this unfortunately it's not a literature
most therapists want to acknowledge they
want to claim that therapy has this
amazing power to heal but that it can
never hurt and of course there's no
treatment for for which that's true
anything you know Tylenol can damage
your liver anything that can help can
also harm
and so I began to look into well were
these kids getting a lot more therapy
and not only were the harms we were
seeing in this generation the lack of
agency the
listlessness the family alienation the
anxiety depression all uh effects of you
know iatrogenic effects of therapy
harmful effects of bad therapy but um we
were seeing this we were seeing this you
know in in it was sorry it was being
applied not not only from actual
therapists but all over the schools and
and from parents parents were having
therapists guide their parenting and
schools were having therapists do trauma
informed care with all the kids so I
started realizing that these kids were
getting a lot more psychological
intervention that I realized and that it
was bad okay so what let's talk about
trauma informed care and let's talk
about why you concluded that it was bad
I mean you pointed first of all to the
fact that as there's been more and more
therapeutic invent intervention you know
as the schools and the universities have
been turned into therapeutic hot beds
the outcome is that mental health has
become worse now you know obviously
self-serving therapists are going to say
well that's just more evidence that even
despite our efforts even more therapy is
necessary right that's the logical
response to that but obviously you're
not convinced that that's the case and
you're implying at least or maybe making
a direct accusation that there's
something about the therapeutic industry
per se that's actually making mental
health worse now Greg lukanov certainly
has is making that case and I would say
it's a case that Jonathan height is
probably what would you say he's uh he's
he's supportive of of of that
implication why did you come to the
conclusion that the Enterprise is doing
more harm than good and what evidence is
there for that do you think
well because they're not treating the
sick they're treating the well so we
know that the risk of iatrogenesis of
the Healer introducing a harm is
greatest when you're treating people who
don't need the treatment to begin with
okay so we know that if you're if you're
gushing blood going to an R ER is an
important thing to do it's necessary
it's lifesaving but if you have a small
bruise you're likely to get you're much
more at risk of getting an infection
from the ER picking up picking up you
know a a Mera or some other bacteria
from an emergency room visit than you
are uh at you know than you stand to
benefit and the same is true with
preventive care we we shifted from
treating kids and treating adolescents
with severe mental health problems to
the idea that everyone should have
therapy and there we exposed a vast
population to risk the risk of all the
known harms of therapy um now you know
I'm not someone who's against therapy
I'm not someone who denies that it can
be important and very useful and even
Curative um but when you treat kids who
are actually don't have a severe problem
you're at much greater risk that they're
just going to the therapist will just
introduce harms and I saw it firsthand
certainly with the kids who convinced
themselves that they were transgender um
very often with a therapist the idea was
reified and and I and we see that across
the board from everything from anxiety
depression uh family alienation the loss
of a sense of agency we're seeing in the
rise of generation they have a external
locus of control in rates we've never
seen before they don't believe they can
improve their own life and they are
highly treatment dependent they think
they have to call a therapist or an
adult before they make any decision
these are young adults who feel that
they can't make a decision in their
lives so we're seeing a lot of the harms
that the that therapy can cause in those
are the same ones that plague the rising
generation right okay so you're you're
pointing to a couple of factors that
play a causal role let's say in the
pathologization of therapy recipients
the first would be false diagnosis so
for example with the kids who have
so-called gender dysphoria I mean you
can look at this technically and it's
quite straightforward thing to do so
basically when it when when anyone is in
a position where they might be seeking
or are likely to be offered
Psychotherapy the fundamental reason for
that is generally an excess of negative
emotion and a dir of positive emotion so
what you essentially see it's very rare
for people to be brought to the
attention of the therapeutic Enterprise
voluntarily or involuntarily unless
they're anxious and depressed so the
first thing you assume if you're a
therapist if you have any sense is
that the anxiety and depression
is the Cardinal reality then there's a
subset then you can become more precise
after that you might say well for this
adolescent or adult their
proclivity toward excess negative
emotion takes the place of bodily
concern for example that's more common
among women generally speaking it's more
common among young women in fact it
might be almost universally prevalent
among young women especially at that
puberty cusp and then you assume that
the misattribution of the depression and
anxiety to the bodily
Transformations is a con is the is to be
the target of the most specific
interventions right you don't jump to
the conclusion that if the person's
depressed and anxious and they show
signs of body dysmorphia then they're
born in the wrong body and they need
surgical intervention there's so many
things wrong with that line of logic
that it's almost a miracle that it could
ever be established right and one of the
errors that's most egregious in that
regard is that you don't recommend the
most damaging potential and irreversible
treatment when you could start with
something much simpler like I
interviewed Khloe Cole right she's a
famous D transitioner she's having a
rough time on every University campus
she goes to and she's suing the
Psychopathic butchers who destroyed her
physiologically and and damaged her
future and um she told
me when I talked to her that no
therapist had ever even explained to her
two simple facts number one that when
women hit puberty when girls hit puberty
there levels of negative emotion
reliably rise and that they because boys
and girls have about the same level of
negative emotion but it switches at
puberty and then women have more
negative emotion comparatively speaking
on average for the rest of their life
and there's lots of reasons for that but
the reasons in some ways are irrelevant
it's the fact that's relevant it's like
well you're 12 you're confused and
anxious lots of people who are confused
and anxious feel that they're the only
people that feel that way right
especially when they're looking at
everybody's Facebook page and their
Instagram page and all they see is this
glamorous lie that people put forward in
relationship to their own life and then
they're especially if they're isolated
kids they can't talk to anyone about it
they feel they're the only people in the
world who feel that way so one of the
things you do if you're a therapist that
has even an iota of a clue is say all
these things that you think are
characteristic of you are actually
they're normative and so you can't be
thinking that there's something
specifically wrong with you even though
you're suffering and then so no one had
ever explained that to her and which is
just appalling right such a lapse of
professional standard that it's that
it's jaw-dropping and then they also
didn't explain to her that here's one of
the things that differentiates men from
women is that when men experience
negative emotion they tend to focus on
their comparative socioeconomic
status when women experience negative
emotion they tend to they tend to focus
on bodily
image and the reason for that likely is
that men are evaluated by women more
harshly for their relative status and
women are evaluated more harshly by men
for their physiological appearance for
the general appearance and so there's
there's a logic to it
but no one explained to her that it was
highly likely in the case of an
adolescent girl who was undergoing
puberty and early and she also said a
she told me that she recognized quite
early maybe around 11 that when she went
through puberty she was going to have a
relatively boyish feature figure and she
had kind of envisioned herself as Khloe
Kardashian right this super curvy
Marilyn Monroe excess you know what it's
almost like a parody in some ways but
you can imagine that standing forward as
a as a kind of Ideal she thought she was
going to be boyish and there was a part
of her that thought well if I'm going to
be boyish maybe I could just be a boy
you know which is a really kind of AI
delusional 11-year-old thought that
should be dispensed with by anyone
credible in about 15 seconds but that
was enough to start her searching down
the wrong rabbit hole and then you know
she got herself put in the hands of
these absolutely criminally incompetent
therapists and they didn't even offer
her the first two bits of information
that anyone with any sense would have
presented to her instead they shunted
her down the bloody hormonal
transformation Road and that's almost a
certain Pathway to you know longer term
well trouble for sure and even surgical
intervention and so God it's just it's
just you just can't believe that such
things are happening you know and so and
some of the important things that you
mentioned you know to to me is that or
the salian things that you mentioned is
first of all that's completely standard
for therapists what what those
therapists did to Khloe Cole is
completely standard affirming increasing
their um their whatever they came in
with agreeing with them the patient and
of course altering their self-
understanding with a diagnosis and when
I interview kids I interviewed this one
young woman Nora who's at a high school
here in Los in in the in Los Angeles
area and she told me that most of her
high school class not only H is in
therapy but they all have this diagnosis
they identify with they a mental health
diagnosis that is one of the classic
negative effects of therapy is that a
patient will come to identify with their
diagnosis and we're seeing that across
the board um now many many people say
well to me well isn't it just social
media isn't this all just coming from
social media I I think that's an
important question I certainly am
someone who you know warned about the
harms of social media in my last book I
certainly think it's had a bad impact on
youth mental health but is it just
social media no I don't think it is um
the mental health deterioration we're
seeing and it's for few reasons um in
2016 the CDC came out with a report that
two that one in six kids between the
ages of 2 and8 had a mental health or
behavioral diagnosis one in six kids
that's in 2016 they didn't have social
media not ages 2 to8 they didn't and
they didn't have smartphones
either so the we know since the 1950s
American Youth and youth in the west has
that mental health has been in
precipitous decline and I think social
media is a part of that but I don't
think it totally answers it and there
are there are two questions I would put
to anyone who would argue well the
answer is just social media the first is
why why has social media been so bad for
youth mental health um a lot of people
they talk about comparing young people's
me their bodies and lives to each other
certainly teenage girls do that a lot
but boys don't tend
to um so that doesn't totally explain it
and the second is why in the last eight
years have we done nothing about it in
fact we've given devices and social
media to younger and younger kids so I I
think both of those answers are
intimately connected to to what the
mental health experts have
done we are experiencing a lot of global
instability as we plunge into primary
season the economy is unstable and
political tensions are high there's no
telling what the next few months will
bring how are you protecting your family
in the midst of all this chaos the fact
is there is one asset that has withstood
famine Wars and political and economic
upheaval dating back to Biblical times
and that's gold and don't think it's too
late to diversify an old Ira or 401K
into gold Birch gold group can help you
do just that with Birch gold you can
create a wellth thought-out and balanced
investment strategy they'll help you
convert an existing Ira or 401K into an
IRA Gold without paying a penny out of
pocket diversify into gold today just
text Jordan to
9898917350 so you you you talked about
it as being standard practice you know
to affirm well there's something else we
should point out here too that's part of
the absolute toxicity of the present
environment is that it's not only
standard
practice if you don't do it as a
therapist your college your your
governing board will come after you
especially if someone complains so if
you're a therapist and you dare say
especially you can imagine a situation
where you're dealing with an adolescent
and the parents have somewhat different
views of the problem and you say to the
family as you should say don't rush into
any long-term decisions you know this
girl who thinks she's a boy or vice
versa the former is more common the
evidence suggests that 80% of people in
that situation will grow out of it by
the time they're 18 and that the Do no
harm pathway forward is to provide
therapeutic counseling perhaps
but not to do anything precipitous now
one parent takes objection to that maybe
a narcissistic parent with borderline
personality disorder because that tends
to be the case in such situations and
decides to write to the College of Psy
psychologists the governing body or to
the College of Physicians well under the
current law and the current culture the
probability that your life will there
then instantly be turned upside down in
some permanent way and that your
livelihood itself will be threatened and
your reputation Savaged even assuming
that you don't face legal repercussions
is extremely high so what I've watched
this has all happened as a consequence
of all that Bloody flag waving about
eliminating the conversion therapy that
was never occurring to begin with right
it's all these consequences of these
adle paded ideologically enforced laws
and so in Canada I've been faced with
the spectacle of my colleagues knowing
full well that everything that's
happening on the transgender front is a
complete bloody murderous lie being
absolutely unwilling to say anything in
public because if they do their
livelihoods will be instantly threatened
by their governing boards so it's not
just standard practice it's it's you do
it or else and then that's combined with
the fact in Canada here's another
example the governing boards that that
that um accredit university programs
that produce clinical psychologists now
and this is happening with all the
therapeutic Endeavors are refusing to
Grant accreditation to any University
that doesn't Orient their clinical
training towards social justice and so
let's unpack that so now you train
therapists that the world is made up of
victims and victimizers and you insist
that they adopt that guys and now you go
out as a therapist and some poored girl
comes to talk to you when she's 13 and
confused and you pay a tremendous amount
of attention to her when she puts your
in the victim position you covertly
reinforce that partly because you have
to legally and partly because you've
been addled by your training and one of
the things you know if you're a
behavioral therapist is that whatever is
rewarded will make itself manifest and
so these poor kids that you're talking
about who take their mental health
diagnosis as their identity they do that
because they acrew the benefits of
differential attention for doing so it's
unbelievably toxic and it's such an
indict of our entire education system
too you imagine that what we're offering
young people as a vision of the future
is so unbearably toxic and
counterproductive that they will choose
to be diagnosed with a mental health
disorder in preference to
normality yeah I mean that's right
obviously but but there's another
problem which is why are parents handing
over their kids to therapists at at the
first first indication of any problem in
fact any no matter how minor deviation
from a benchmark they go to diagnose and
medicate and the problem is not only do
we not know what goes on in that room
not only does the profession make no
make no effort to track um harmful
effects of their interventions unlike
doctors who are mandated you know to
report uh side effects of their drugs um
not only is that going on but you know
we're seeing kids have these harms and
there's no feedback mechanism anxiety is
worse therapists don't tra track whether
their whether their treatments have made
anxiety worse or depression worse for a
kid and we know therapy can do that and
we certainly know the therapeutic
interventions the focus on feelings
constantly constantly ruminating on sad
moments in your life the way they're
asked to in school all of that is very
bad for mental health um and and
constantly questioning everything you're
going to do before you do it all of
these are the opposite of what we would
want young people to do and that's what
therapeutic School schooling efforts
have done parenting efforts have done
and and and actual therapists have done
and and I'll say you know the last thing
is that you know
parents unwillingness to assert their
own authority in their homes has been a
disaster because it let therapists in
the door to be that Authority and
unfortunately unlike parents therapists
are incentivized to keep the least sick
coming back for the longest period of
time well I'm going to defend parents
for a moment because sure um well I'd
like to shed light on why they do that I
mean the the the narcissistic
compassionate types you know so they're
the ones that tilt towards borderline
personality disorder let's say so we
know maybe that about half the mothers
of daughters who have rapid onset gender
dysphoria and who move forward with
therapy and treatment up to half of them
are diagnosable with something like
borderline personality disorder that's a
big problem so one of the
characteristics of people with
borderline personality disorder is that
they will manipulate other people in any
way that you could possibly imagine to
gain attention for themselves and if
that means sacrificing their children to
their pretentions of compassion that's
no problem at all now if you're in a
relationship with someone like that the
probability that you're going to be able
to withand that pressure especially when
the system itself is is has its guns
aimed on you and if you do stand up and
say you know I I don't think my child
should be heading in that direction that
you're going to be pillared as uncaring
and as a victimizer and then it's even
worse because the bloody therapists and
this is where I'm most appalled about my
colleagues who accepted this uh claim
emanating from the worst of the
Psychopaths that well you know would you
rather would you rather have a live
trans child or a dead child now I tell
you man there's not a parent an ordinary
parent like a non psychologically
trained Planet uh parent on the planet
who when faced with that accusation by a
physician or a psychologist isn't going
to fold say oh my God this is worse than
I thought there's some risk that my
child will commit suicide and if I don't
get on board with this in every possible
way and something terrible happens it's
going to be laid at my feet and then if
the accusations of being uncaring and
victimizing are going along with that
well it's just and then the other thing
too that's happening Abigail is that
parents just can't believe these things
are happening in their schools you know
like I'm seeing this in Canada I I know
Canadians are so asleep that it's kind
of miracle and I've tried to think that
through it's like okay how can people be
so bloody blind and then I think okay
you can stay
blind and assume that it's still 1990 so
roughly speaking the political parties
do what they say they'll do and they're
trustworthy the Legacy Media isn't lying
all the time the educational
institutions aren't completely corrupt
the Judiciary is still intact the legal
system hasn't Twisted itself into knots
or you can dismiss all that as some sort
of right-wing conspiratorial thinking
and continue along your Merry path and
if the price you pay for that is that
the the psychopathic teachers get their
claws in your child by the time you
figure that out it's going to be a bit
too late and I'm really seeing this in
especially in Canada it's like
people even if you bring these things to
their attention they think and I can
understand this they think there's no
way things can be that bad you have to
be imagining it and now and then i' I've
stepped back and thought well Jesus you
know I did get
harassed by my University and my
governing board which is still going on
and so maybe I've got more paranoid than
I should be you know and then I see what
happened in Washington DC with the
presidents of upen MIT and Harvard and I
think oh no I saw this seven years ago
as clear as a bell and it's worse even
than I think and certainly it's making
itself manifest in this pathological
therapeutic environment right now you
said something very interesting too
here's something something cool so if
you do statistical analysis you can
group self you can group the statements
that make people that people make about
themselves into
categories and so one category is
negative emotion and so if you have if
you're high in the trait of negative
emotion be associated with depression
and anxiety you feel more shame and more
guilt more anxiety and more
depression self-referential state ments
of all kinds load with neuroticism okay
this is an unbelievably important
Discovery they load so completely that
the personality test used for assessing
neuroticism the the most common one the
neop has
self-consciousness as a subset of
neuroticism so that means there's no
difference between being self-conscious
and being depressed and anxious they're
they're not linked they're the same
thing so now you go to therapy a and the
halfwit therapist does nothing but make
you self-conscious right well why does
so and the and the implication is and
your teachers in school do the same
thing your teachers guide you in social
emotional learning they do emotions
check-ins they are constantly asking you
how are you feeling it is the best way
to induce depression and anxiety in kids
and that's what they're doing nonstop
and unfortunately parents are not only
handing over their kids to these people
but they're doing it themselves they're
constantly checking in they're letting
therapists guide their parenting instead
of taking the Reigns back and doing what
we know works better with kids number
one is Parental Authority which of
course doesn't mean being cold it
doesn't mean being cruel it just means
that that the parents make the rules for
the house not some therapist well we
could so this also speaks to the issue
of POS of identity you know and I've
I've been trying to take this apart
because I'm so embarrassed about the
clinical Enterprise now and I thought
you know our whole notion of mental
health is actually it's it's corrupt and
the reason for that is that we think
mental health is mental it's inside it's
subjective right and if you're healthy
it's because you're self-actualizing
right and if you're unhappy it's because
the self isn't properly organized as an
interior structure but the problem with
that is it's just it's actually not true
and you can tell that's not true because
you can't be happy in a miserable
marriage and the reason you can't be
happy in a miserable marriage is because
you're you but you're also your married
self and then you're your married self
plus your friendships and your business
relationships and your ties to the
broader community and what what what
psychological well-being is it's not
even the right term what what human
well-being is is proper situation in a
hierar Archy that includes the social
environment and so what that implies is
that the more you think about yourself
the less you're focusing on how to
establish solid reliable and reciprocal
social relations right an intimate
relationship friendship the bonds of a
family and then the the the N the what
would you say the less tightly
[Music]
wound binding that you have with the
broader community
in the absence of all that you
concentrate on yourself well not only
you're miserable and depressed and
anxious you're also isolated lonely and
insane and that all stems from that
initial presumption that all we would
have to do is get your head straight and
you'd be sane it's like and so you think
what does that also mean for the
identity of kids because we should be
teaching them look you're going to have
to take your place in the world you need
a partner you need some friends you need
an occupation you need an educational
plan like you have to situate yourself
in the world none of that's relevant
anymore all that is is oppression it's
no bloody wonder the kids choose a
mental health diagnosis as the
alternative to the normality that's
nothing well we what we did was we G
gave kids these incredibly unhealthy
lives as you said these atomized lives
and we told them that they were so
unique in the world and separable and
that that was all all that was important
and then we poured Mental Health
Resources into an incredibly unhealthy
life and then mental health experts pose
as the solution to the unhappy life
meanwhile they've been participating the
entire time in in the idea that kids are
weak in the idea that they can't get
through a car ride without without an
iPad that they need to be told
constantly that they are loved and that
they are amazing at everything they have
guided everything in the wrong direction
they have provided nothing that we know
to be good for making kids feel you know
actually achieve happiness happiness one
of them is not focusing on your
happiness and not making happiness your
goal another thing is doing things for
others in the world feeling part of a
social fabric all those things that you
said are so important none of those help
have a role for a mental health expert
which is why the mental health experts
took us in the wrong direction yeah
experts yeah well I watched the bloody
social psychologists and the educational
psychologists put forward psychological
principles that were so appalling
misguided for decades it was just
painful to watch so one of them that
emerged out of social psychology which
is a discipline with plenty of sins on
its conscience the whole self-esteem
movement to me was just a jaw-dropping
nightmare watching that as a trained
clinician it's like I see so your
presumption is that you can make kids
feel good about themselves by
celebrating non achievements that's your
plan and so that swept through the
school system like mad and so that was
just as Jean twang twang has pointed out
that was just a pathway it was really
what they were doing Abigail was they
were instructing children in how to be
narcissistic and that narcissism was
confused with self-esteem right and
what's really strange this is quite
interesting so technically speaking if
you look at self-esteem scales there's
actually no difference between them and
scales of negative emotion it's a false
construct so if you have low self-esteem
which is not something that technically
exists it's no different than being
depressed and anxious and you don't lift
people out of depression and anxiety by
making them narcissistic which is what
the social psychologist recommended and
then the educational psychologist okay
then they Foster this dependency that
you described so that children can't
they can't even go out of their bloody
house without asking for permission
right everything every important
decision has to be made with guidance
right so they're fostering dependency
like a devouring mother so they're
teaching narcissism they're fostering
dependence then they Implement these
this whole culture of trigger warning
and protection which is exactly the
opposite of what you would do if you
were an actual like uh credible
therapist because what you do to make
people less anxious is find out what
they're afraid of and then expose them
in graduated doses to what they're
afraid of you don't say well you're a
victim and now you have to protected
from everything what you do if you do
that is you make them worse so lukanov
has claimed and I think he's exactly
right is that if the Therapeutic
Community the educational psychologists
and the social psychologists the social
workers all included had set out to
design a course of action to make
children as mentally unstable as
possible and they used the proper
behavioral techniques to do so we would
have ended up in exactly the situation
we're in right now teaching them to be
narcissistic teach them to be and
Destroy Merit at the same time teach
them to be dependent shelter them from
everything and have them focus in a
NeverEnding uh process on their own
feelings right it's so it's so
diabolical that well it's the sort of
thing that you know drives you down
conspiratorial webs it's I can't believe
it's happened it's it's jaw-dropping so
what what have you seen as the
manifestations of this what have you
been writing about specifically in your
new book so uh to take one example you
know I interviewed a a woman i' I've
known for a long time who runs a major
by named Evelyn I call her Evelyn in the
book who who runs a major uh cellular
biology lab at one of our nation's
Premier Research institutions and she
tells me that the kids she's seeing
aside from all their you know the
anxiety and depression and the fact that
they constantly in the last decade
update her on their mental health
regularly uh that's not something she's
ever asked for but they now give her
updates but the other thing is they're
afraid to try for the first time even
the most qualified kids with strong
scientific backgrounds are afraid to
make a move without checking with her
and they're afraid to do anything on
their own things that K kids with less
ability less scientific grounding ought
to be able to go for it they can't go
for it their sense of agency has been
eroded that's not from social media okay
that's not from smartphones entirely if
at all it's from an idea that you it's
treatment dependency I have to check
with an adult or exp bird before I do
anything that's what our young adults
now think and I do think that our
therapeutic era and our therapeutic
so-called experts have taught them
this are you tired of feeling sluggish
run down or just not your best self take
control of your health and vitality with
balance of nature balance of nature
fruits and veggies are a great way to
make sure sure you're getting essential
nutritional ingredients every single day
they use an advanced cold vacuum process
that encapsulates fruits and vegetables
into Whole Food supplements without
sacrificing their natural antioxidants
the capsules are completely void of
additives fillers extracts synthetics
pesticides or added sugars the only
thing in balance of Nature's fruit and
veggie capsules are well fruits and
veggies right now you can order with
promo code Jordan to get 35% off your
first order Plus plus a free fiber and
spice supplement there's never been an
easier way to make sure you're getting
your daily dose of fruits and vegetables
experience balance of nature for
yourself today go to balance of
nature.com and use promo code Jordan for
35% off your first order as a preferred
customer plus get a free bottle of fiber
and spice that's balanceof nature.com
promo code Jordan for 35% off your first
preferred order plus a free bottle of
fiber and
Spice
oh okay well there's something else so
we could add to the Litany of ways to
teach your children to be neurotic the
following okay so let's deem all
competition
inappropriate okay so any competitive
Enterprise is inappropriate okay so why
would we do that well there is a thrill
in Victory but there is a catastrophe in
defeat right and there's negative
emotion associated with defeat and then
you might say as well that the positive
emotion associ Victory is morally
untenable because it comes at someone
else's expense so that's an extension of
the victim victimizer narrative okay so
now you eradicate competition all right
so why so in favor hypothetically of
cooperation whatever you get rid of
competitive games for example or or you
dissuade them so now what's the
consequence of that well we might say
well why do you teach why do you
encourage children to play competitive
games and you might say well they can
develop the skills it's fun and they
have the possibility of winning but
here's a better
Theory it teaches them to
lose right it teaches them that that you
do lose it teaches them that you can
lose it teaches them that you can lose
gracefully without a catastrophe and
then you can get up on your feet and you
congratulate the winners and you can go
on playing okay so now imagine all of
that's been taken away from you right
right up to the time you're 18 you've
never failed in your bloody life and so
now you're terrified of it because you
think that at the bottom of the failure
pit is nothing but utter Insanity well
now that's true for you because you're a
complete novice at failing how the hell
are you going to take a risk right so
part of what you know you you see this
when you go see your kids in in a in a
sporting event what you hope is that
your child has enough sense to be a
gracious loser and the reason there's no
here's a problem position for you
there's no difference between being a
gracious loser and being
resilient they're the same thing so we
forgo competition in the name of the
protection of the feelings of the losers
and what we do is we demolish
everybody's resilience along with these
other four catastrophic failures that we
listed and why did we become afraid why
did we become afraid of competition why
did we become suddenly fearful that our
child would ever lose why did we the
moment they ever did you know exhibited
any Behavior outside of of the norm
maybe thought they had a a different
gender identity why did we rush them to
an expert why if they' never reached any
D metric do we rush them to an E expert
because we were afraid of trauma trauma
was at the heart of a lot of this we
became terrified of this Bugaboo trauma
now it isn't the case that any of these
things produce trauma or damage to our
kids the best psychological research of
course shows that is it's the opposite
resilience is the norm whenever there's
a potentially traumatic effect you know
uh event for a child but we parents
became so terrified of trauma that they
stopped trusting their instincts they
stopped trusting what they knew was
right what they knew in their bones was
best for kids and instead became overly
dependent on people who were very much
incentivized to want to treat sick kids
and to claim that the least sick were
actually quite sick and continue to
treat them and that's what we're seeing
all right so let me offer you a terrible
hypothesis okay because we might as well
in for a penny in for a
pound so behind this I can't help but
see the Spectre of the devouring mother
so I'm going to lay out a hypothesis for
you and it's a terrible hypothesis and I
hope it isn't true but you tell me what
you think about this okay so now we're
in landscape where half of women who are
30 are childless
and half of them will never have a child
and 90% of them will regret it okay so
that's 20% of women that's going to be
their fate and according to Jonathan
height and his new research that fate is
much more likely among more liberal
women okay so that's the that's the
statistical reality so now we're also in
a situation where much of the direct
care and administrative work that's
associated with the education of
children all the way through from
kindergarten through university is in
the hands of women from the ages of 20
to 40 now a subset of those women are
going to have a hyperdeveloped maternal
side that has the proclivity to treat
anything in their view site as an
infant so I'm thinking that part of the
reason that we've transformed the
entire educational Enterprise which is
fundamentally female dominated into an
overgrown Nursery is because it's run by
W it's run by women who have misplaced
their maternal Instinct because and
here's why I think
this women have this terrible conundrum
when it comes to children and it's a
really tough conundrum and I think this
is probably why human beings are parir
bonding
creatures so my daughter just had a baby
and the baby is a month premature and
she said the baby just wants to be with
me nonstop it's like it isn't even want
right it's absolute bloody need and the
right attitude for a woman for the first
year of a child's life starts to switch
around 9 months so let's say N9 months
the first nine months is every single
need that child has is to be regarded as
100% accurate unquestionable and to be
immediately responded to and so that
instinct has to be extraordinarily
powerful because infants who don't have
someone around who are operating on that
basis they're either going to die or
they're not going to thrive and I mean
the human infants are unbelievably
fragile it doesn't take that much to
disrupt that early Bond and that can
have catastrophic consequences okay so
that means that women first of all have
that proclivity it's at hand right and
then it also means that they have to
undergo this very difficult process when
the child starts to mature the
psychoanalysts called it the necessarily
the necessary failure of the good mother
is that you have to step the hell back
right you got to stop doing everything
for helpless infant even though that was
the most spectacular manifestation of
your love and you have to let the child
bump up against the world and get hurt
and that is a damn difficult thing to
negotiate and to some degree that's when
fathers step in you know because they'll
encourage they have a higher threshold
for child distress let's say especially
in that transition from infancy to
toddlerhood now you got to ask yourself
we've had this radical trans demographic
transformation that it's unfolded over
the last 40 years and so most women half
of women now at 30 are still childless
what the hell's happening to that
maternal proclivity and I would say well
it's overpour into the educational
establishments and you see that with the
therapeutic industry as well and so
because when I look at the universities
I think oh I see Everyone's an infant so
it's like there's infants infant
caregivers and predators
that's the simple world of of that's the
most simple basic feminine physiological
world and I think our institutions have
been transformed
into what would you say NeverEnding
nurseries you know Freud you know one of
the things about Freud that that that
people have forgotten like Freud pointed
to the pathological narcissism of
dependency inducing mothers as the
biggest developmental impediment to
human beings that's the edle
situation no and that's an unbelievably
accurate observation you know we we are
very dependent human beings and we need
our mothers but the fact that that
maternal provision is so absolutely
necessary also means it can go
spectacularly wrong and something like
you're you're you're looking for a
solution right because you said Well it
can't just be social media it it's not
just social media it can't just be the
education system system like is it not
possible that this is reflective of a
more fundamental transformation in the
way that men and women are operating in
society there there's no question but we
did come to see our kids as weak we came
to see them as infants the problem is we
had traditions of child rearing we had a
sense of knock it off Shake it off
you'll be fine not for a kid a broken
arm but for minor injuries we used to
tell our kids that we remember that from
our own childhoods but we stop trusting
ourselves and rely on Experts and they
taught us that our kids were weak that
they could never recover and I'll give
you an example I got a call I got
actually an email from a woman who loved
my last book and she was a child
psychologist from a very trained very
wealth trained very good school she's in
her 60s and she really wanted to be of
help with my new book bad therapy so
okay she's a parenting coach and a child
psychologist and I and she told me with
my last book I was doing the Lord's work
that's what she called it I said okay I
would love to talk to you so I called
her and said I said you know I'm going
to ask you some questions about child
why we're seeing so much pain in the
rising generation can we speak on the
record and she saidoh no no no
absolutely not my my adult daughter uh
if she finds out I talk to you she'll
cut me off right right now this is a
woman who's a parenting
coach the number of people she should be
advising on parenting is
zero because she has raised a daughter
to adulthood who if she disagreed with
with her mother about who her mother
talks to what journalist she talks to
would cut her off you see we stopped
taking the we stopped being devoted to
making our kids strong and making them
decent that used to be the goal of
parenting but instead we thought oh no
the the idea of parenting is to make
them mentally healthy we're going to
shoot for wellness and we did a terrible
job of that and we didn't make them
strong and we didn't make them decent so
why okay so let's see if we can figure
out why that happened you know like it
it's it's often useful if you do a
diagnosis of any given situation
properly the first thing you do is look
for contextual factors right now people
generally don't do this to themselves if
they're looking at why they are in
trouble they'll look for a self-
attribution right and there's some
there's something about that that's
admirable because it's taking
responsibility but people are more
determined by situations if they're
healthy than they are by their own
intrinsic temperament so the first thing
you do as a good diagnostician is you
think okay what are the overarching
contextual issues here that are at play
so maybe we could figure that out so
you're pointing to the fact that somehow
parents lost faith in their ability to
even in their children's ability to
direct themselves so let me offer you a
couple of reasons for that you tell me
what you think okay well first of all we
have fewer
children so that means every child is
more precious
if for no other reason that parents
aren't outnumbered like when you have
six kids you can't focus obsessively on
all of them you just don't have the time
plus they're torturing each other and
raising each other to a fair degree but
if you have one
child you can focus all your attention
now let's let's make that worse not only
do you only have one child you didn't
have that child till you were 30 and so
you're pretty bloody attached to that
child and it's your last
chance right and you're wealthy are
comparatively wealthy so now you're
you're desperate to make sure that
everything that could it could possibly
be good happens to this child you're not
going to get another chance and you have
endless resources to pour into them okay
so so just those and then you can
imagine this as well the child doesn't
have a lot of siblings doesn't have a
lot of cousins and so that means that
any proclivity for narcissism that that
child might manifest naturally and that
might be even encouraged by the parents
is not going to be pounded out of them
in the various ways that siblings and
cousins would absolutely take it out of
them right and then you add to that too
the fact that children are more isolated
than they were in terms of their play
patterns they don't play freely together
almost all play episodes are scheduled
even if they're scheduled the idiot
parents will often plop the kids down in
front of a TV or a screen so they don't
play that means they're not socializing
each other and so that's a that's a very
toxic brew and we we have no idea what
you know the typical Caucasian mother is
now old first time is old enough to be
the typical Caucasian
grandmother right it we've almost got to
that point we have no idea we have no
idea what that signifies in terms of of
its effect on on reproductive patterns
and also the case that we have so many
kids that are only
children that older mothers richer
parents these are massive changes and
it's and maybe maybe part of the
consequences exactly what we're talking
about is that the children are doomed to
being over plus then there's a worse
situation too
because people are more atomized and so
that also means that the
multigenerational wisdom that might be a
necessity for knowing how to raise
children is also disappearing I just
help my son and and and my
daughter-in-law work through a
disciplinary issue with their 12 12
month- old daughter and my son and my
daughter-in-law pretty together people
and I had I had told them what they
could do but telling them didn't work I
had to show them they couldn't really
put what was necessary into practice
without have without it being directly
modeled and so we also don't know how
much of the
intergenerational wisdom that was part
and parcel of an intact culture we've
completely obliterated because of you
know extreme social Mobility for example
so I think a lot of the factors you
mentioned do play a role but I want to
tell you why I think that the mental
health experts in our complete
therapeutic flooding with therapy and
therapeutic Concepts has played a big
part in it okay and that is because we
look at other cultures I interviewed a
woman in who runs the Georgetown
emotions lab who looks and I asked her
why kids were so young people were so
disregulated in America when you look at
other cultures and they're doing much
better like Japan they only have one
child in Japan and you you mentioned
that might be a factor but they don't
treat their children as fragile they're
not haunted by the possibility of trauma
that a spanking that anything could
traumatize a child they're not haunted
and they think Independence for a child
meaning going off and doing things
without oversight is a good in fact in
preschools in Japan there are areas that
the children could get hurt and areas
where the teacher can't see and the idea
is kids have to be able to negotiate
their own interpersonal conflicts with
each other without an adult intermediary
they do the same thing in Israel in
Israel at age eight kids are supposed to
get on a bus and go to school you were
look down on if your parents drive you
it is not done in Israel if your parents
drive you to school why because they
need to be able to negotiate how to get
to a su a school bus and by the way
along the way it turns out you uh do uh
Dr chova uh
told me this that she followed these
kids because she did research on these
kids and along the way they were talking
they were going into a bakery and buying
themselves something they were talking
to neighbors they were learning to
handle themselves all the kid things
that kids in the west used to learn to
do because the parents gave them the
freedom to do it before we became
surveillance parents terrified of
emotional injury we let kids be we let
them go off and do things and handle
their own conflicts and it made them
strong ER and then we became terrified
that we couldn't let them because they
would be because they were actually weak
and this idea that anything could
traumatize your child anything could
leave a lasting psychological imprint
that they could never get rid of this
came right from the mental health
industry this came right from the idea
that the body keeps the score it holds
on to your trauma forever you can never
let it go it's not true um according to
many many experts I interviewed and it
but unfortunately it's led to all kind
kind of terrifi Terror that any child
childhood trauma causes adult
Psychopathology and and also also false
that adult Psychopathology is
necessarily caused by childhood trauma
neither is true nor is it true that
being permanently damaged by a traumatic
incident is the norm resilience is the
norm so all these bad ideas I I believe
really came through the vector of the
mental health experts well thing okay so
we might as well offer some definition
so people experience negative emotion
when some when an OB when an unexpected
obstacle arises in their path okay and
those can take two forms they can be
obstacles that you can skirt or they can
be obstacles that stop you in your
tracks okay the more important the thing
you're
pursuing the more likely an obstacle
that stops you in your tracks is to
cause trauma
okay and what the trauma is is the
dissolution of the structure of
direction that you were engaging in so
here's an example this would be an
example of a relatively serious
emotional upset let's say so you're you
decide you want to be a
doctor and you work very hard at it and
you take the MCAT and you get your
results and you're in the 15th
percentile okay so that's likely to
cause a fair bit of emotional upset and
worse it you're not going to be a
doctor that's gone now imagine you put
40% of your resources into that plan
okay so now the trauma is that you have
to sacrifice that 40% investment now
then you might say well the the norm is
resilience okay so the way that becomes
not a trauma is you decide to become a
nurse let's say and that
works when you encounter an obstacle
you've got two choices
you can either figure out how to get
around it and continue on your path or
you can choose A New
Path if you're incapable of choosing A
New Path then you're traumatized now you
might say well you know how serious is
the trauma and the answer is well it
depends on how important the plan was so
here's another example let's say you're
happily married and you have been for 10
years and you trust your husband
implicitly then you find out that he's a
Serial womanizer and he's had affairs
that stem back from before you were
right right from the time you you
started going out with him so everything
you think you know about him is a lie
okay so now the trauma is your whole
past is a lie your present no longer
exists and your future whatever the hell
it is isn't what you think it's going to
be and then it's even worse than that
because if you were that Bloody gullible
how much of everything else you do is
now up for question okay so that just
does people in now those sorts of things
do happen to people right and if they're
unresolved they leave a permanent
ho said if they're unresolved right now
as you pointed out generally people
resolve such things but not inevitably
now the problem doesn't come so much
with the notion that some things are
traumatic the problem comes with being
unable to dis differentiate between
trauma you know like your marriage is
over and falling off your when you're
learning to ride a bike when you're
going to a playground right is there has
to be a distinction
between levels of negative emotion and
partly what you want to do with your
child is you want to expose them to
situations where they encounter
obstacles even serious obstacles losses
for example in a championship game so
that they can learn strategies of
resilience so so I don't think it's
exactly fair to so well I don't think
it's fair to put put the problem at the
hands of people who make the claim that
such a thing as trauma exists it's more
accurate to put the blame at okay okay
okay so so fine I just let me give you
let me give you a a prior story to your
story what if we welded the training
wheels onto the bike so they could never
be removed what if we started out
childhood where we only gave the kids
the softest fabrics and any foods they
didn't like we substituted for Foods
they did like and if and if a dog scared
them we we asked all our neighbors to
Crate their dogs whenever we visited and
what if we told the kids over and over
we affirmed all their worries and we
dropped everything to deal with their
worries because that's what the best
experts were telling us to do what if we
never let them choose a friend we didn't
like or get their hearts broken and then
we rush to intercede the moment they
expressed any hurt they might show up to
at college so unprepared not even to
fail their medical you know tests but
even to deal with any minor danger or
discomfort that we would see what we're
seeing kids having nervous breakdowns
over the most humdrum challenges and in
fact you know this this woman who's the
head of the emotions robaba Georgetown
who I interviewed Dr chova Dutton when
she said to me that when she look when
she did research cross-culturally on
emotional responses to dangers in young
adults that American Kids tend to
exaggerate the degree of danger posed by
small things like a stranger on the
street looking at you funny that felt
dangerous to American Kids why because
they' never had to face even these small
risks themselves uh we were too afraid
to let them yeah well that's the classic
that's the classic edle nightmare so in
the in the Disney snow so one of the
things you see about classic Disney
movies is that there's almost always an
evil
queen right and what the evil queen does
is interfere with the development of the
prince or the princess right so in Snow
White the evil queen is jealous of of
the upcoming princess's Beauty jealous
of the fact that she gets a chance to
establish a new relationship and
perfectly willing to poison her because
of her Envy right and in Sleeping Beauty
you have Prince I think it's prince
philli in Sleeping Beauty she locks him
in a dungeon and tells him that she's
going to keep him there until he's so
old that nobody could possibly find him
attractive and when he does manage to
escape uh with the help of some feminine
fairies little feminine fairies which
are like emblematic of the mother who's
actually useful she turns into like the
dragon that's the ultimate predator and
virtually Burns him to the ground right
well so this is this is the reason I'm
I'm pointing out these symbolic
representations is because this
proclivity of symbolically feminine
overprotection to become the ultimate
destructive force is a motif that's been
developed through the entire
developmental history of humanity and
its literature it's like that it's an
unbelievable danger and for some reason
as you pointed out it's become
increasingly dominant in our culture and
it's not something about which people
can have very straightforward
conversations you know but I I think the
story that you described is exactly
right now one of the things we do know
too is that the mothers who are
overbearing in that manner are also
those who are more likely to show the
kinds of they call it cluster B
Psychopathology so it's it's this weird
intermingling of hyper compassion but
it's hyper compassion turned for
narcissistic purposes so look the mother
that you just described here's what she
can do she can tell all her neighbors
and her family how much of a martyr she
is for spending every bloody second of
her whole whole life doing nothing but
caring for her poor infant so now she's
super mother and the payoff for her is
well of course she can't pursue her own
career of course she can't take on any
responsibilities because she's so busy
pouring out every excess resource she
has into this child and so she's
perfectly motivated to make her child as
miserable and wretched as possible
because that opens up the space for her
overweening what maternal compassion to
dominate completely so that she can
parade her virtue to her friends and her
neighbors right and child yeah and the
child will end up overtreated they will
end up diagnosed they will end up on
psychotropic drugs so they never feel
life at full force they never feel they
can do things on their own and you know
you started by talking about Khloe Cole
and when I was researching about G you
know the rapid rise in transgender
identification one of the things a
therapist never told her is that gender
dysphoria like a lot of psychological
issues isues that someone can have or or
problems someone can have they actually
resolve by growing up puberty often
cures a lot of uh gender dysphoria so
too I mean this is the subtitle of the
book why the kids aren't growing up
you're growing up believe it you know
adulthood growing into adulthood is
actually the cure for a lot of the
troubles teenagers are beset with and if
we gave kids the resources to grow up if
we weren't afraid for them to be two
steps away from us or for us not to
surveil them constantly um it and we let
them grow up a lot of these problems
would resolve on their own we're just
not letting them well the clinical
literature shows that clearly is that
that it's 80% of gender dysphoria
conditions resolve on their own by the
age of 18 well it's also partly and I
think this is Tangled into the ideology
like if we regard our culture as such as
nothing but
oppressive then taking your place in
that culture does nothing but oppress
you and make you an oppressor right so
that pretty much takes everything that
adulthood could offer off the table
right and I certainly see this also in
what schools do to young men like
schools teach young men that their
ambition is nothing but the
manifestation of oppressive patriarchal
power and so you basically take all of
the benefits the moral benefits of
becoming an adult off the table you
don't say to a young man it's like
well you know when you're a child you
have the possibilities of the world at
hand and and you're relatively free from
um care and privation but the price you
pay for that is you have no Independence
and the beauty of being an adult is you
you're free to have your adventure
you're free to have your adventure you
can you can sink or you can swim and
there's real cost to that but the payoff
is
you can you can have your life and and
you can do great things and you can
serve other people and you can take your
place as a husband and as a as a an
honored member of the community and you
can do useful things in the world and
that's so worthwhile that giving up the
pleasures of childhood is is the obvious
thing to do I there isn't a school in
the country I think maybe that's a bit
of an exaggeration where that's ever
made explicit to young people you know
may maybe Hill College maybe Hillsdale
College and that's about it yeah right
but also not a home in the country and
that's part of the problem so in other
words you know when parents were felt
comfortable being authorities in their
own home with their own kids there was
something for kids to Aspire to but
through this gentle parenting the
therapist-led parenting that we're
seeing where the role of the parent is
really to be an empath to feel a child's
pain and to adjust and accommodate it
there's nothing nothing for a child to
graduate too it doesn't look so great to
be a child's slave and that's what
parents have become so the P so there is
no reason to adoles out of
childhood um and we're not offering them
a reason there's no
graduation well you can also understand
why that's a vicious spiral right
because you can also understand why
young people would be more loath to have
children under those circumstances you
know when I was counseling young women
my my my Essential what would you call
it ideological position I don't think
it's ideological my Essential position
was it's good for you to have your
career when you have your child because
then what you're doing is modeling for
your child the fact that adults have
useful things to do and since your child
is going to have to be an adult that's a
good thing to model now it's going to be
tricky for you to figure out how to get
the balance right because you have to
attend to your children a lot especially
when they're young and you're going to
want to to but that doesn't mean you
should torture yourself with guilt
because as an adult you have a life you
children have to see that so they want
to become adults right and so now if if
the if your destiny as an adult is slave
of two year-old well who the hell who
the hell there's nothing more
demoralizing than being a slave to a
2-year-old partly because they're little
tyrants most of the time and you can't
give into their the immediacy of their
demands that there's no that's no way to
live and it's stunningly demoralizing
for the 2-year-old because there's
nothing more hopeless and I've seen this
in children there is nothing more
existentially hopeless than a
three-year-old who's in control it's
like where the hell does he have to go
he's already hit the Pinnacle of the
social world as far as he's concerned
whatever he wants goes God and it's
terrifying it's actually terrifying them
to have that much power and and fear is
another thing we're seeing in this
generation they are terribly
fear they also don't want to have kids
this is the first generation where
majority does want to have kids well we
didn't make it look very good um and and
I think that is part of the problem we
didn't give them something to hold up
and say one day I want to be like that I
can and I can do it uh they really doubt
they can do things in the world that
they are ready to raise children that's
so sad you know I just talked to my
son-in-law cuz my daughter just had a
baby and I said to him look here's
something you have to understand you
need to know this that this baby that's
just been
born this person wants nothing more than
to have the best possible relationship
with you that it's possible to have with
anyone that's what they're offering you
is that if you're a father and you have
a clue and you have a new child you are
being offered the opportunity to
establish the best relationship with any
anyone you've ever had in your life and
the person that you could establish that
relationship with wants nothing more
than that so that's a hell of an offer
so then you can just imagine how Bloody
Far We've W walked off any sort of
reasonable pathway so that young people
now look at that with Dread right it's
it's because that notion has become like
you know I had a great career like
because I started my academic career
teaching at Harvard and that was a
pretty d good deal and that place was
really hopping in the 1990s and the
students were great I loved my job and I
really enjoyed the Consulting I worked
and my clinical practice I had a very
fulfilling career and I would certainly
say that that was all well and good but
there was nothing better than being with
my kids than my wife nothing better and
so and the fact that people can't
understand that they see that only as a
burdensome what as as a burden it's so
horrible because it also means that they
don't see they don't they certainly
don't see the best of what life has to
offer I also feel very sorry for young
women it's so perverse you know because
most of the notion
that women shouldn't be locked at home
let's say barefoot and pregnant with
their little kids a tremendous amount of
that comes from the left and it's so
weird to me because the leftist ID
ideologues insist that women need to be
freed to do what to enter the corporate
world and I think okay well I thought
you guys were leftwing how did we get to
the situation where it was obvious that
what a young woman should do is
prioritize her slavery to the capitalist
Endeavor in favor of being at home with
her kids especially when they're young
now I know I'm exaggerating to some
degree but but it's so we lie terribly
to young men and we demoralize them but
The Lies We Tell young women are of a
whole different order of magnitude that
the notion that career is going going to
be more important than anything else and
that you should forego children for that
I I don't know if I've ever met anyone
for whom that was actually true I I
completely agree and I think that you
know if we had a ro more robust
confidence among parents you would see
that communicated because I don't know
parents for whom that isn't true
certainly it's true for me there's
nothing in my life that has been more
gratifying or more imbued my life with
more meaning than having my own children
it was by far the most dramatic change
in my life when I had kids and we've
forgotten what a profound opportunity
and sense of meaning and responsibility
it is because we let the experts analyze
it and we actually started taking on
their oh we started describing our kids
I when I interviewed parents I would
hear them talk about their kids
according to their diagnosis well this
is my ADHD kid I would hear them say you
hear that now well my kids Spectre me
you know that's not how parents ever
talk to about their children why because
they were our kids and it didn't matter
what the experts what categories the Ed
what Rubik's they fell under they were
they were our children and somewhere
along the line we forgot that and we
started looking through at our own
children through the lens that these
experts gave us and it's wrong and it's
damaging to our relationship with them
how old were you if you don't mind me
asking how old were you when you had
your first child 31 okay okay so so you
okay so now you said know you just said
that there wasn't anything in your life
that had happened to you that that was I
had a client very high achieving um
lawyer right and she was very attractive
person very hardworking like she she had
she was quite an admirable person and
then she had a baby and she and she told
me she was quite funny she said well I'd
always sort of thought of children as
like an fashion accessory up to this
point you know is something else you
added to your life and she was
absolutely dumbfounded at the degree to
which she fell in love with her child
and she had a child pretty late you know
and it just turned her love life upside
down and you see I saw this with women
in law firms all the time is you know
they were high performing career
oriented women and then they'd have a
child and they'd think
oh nothing I ever did was nearly as
significant as this so what what what
did that come as a revelation to you
like did you expect that what what
happened in your case I'll tell you a
moment where I realized it when my Sons
were four years old they were they had
started u playing piano I have twin sons
and um one of my sons we got to the
recital and he was very nervous and they
had the kids get up there and say my
name is Jack and you had to say your
name and I and uh uh identify the piece
you were going to play and he started to
get very nervous he didn't want to get
up there and I didn't know what to do I
thought this could be catastrophe should
I take him out maybe it's too young and
my husband said to me just let him let
him be and I did I just backed off let
him do this he was very nervous I didn't
know if and they called him up there and
he he announced to the crowd as loud as
as as could be my name is Jack and I'm
going to play and announced his piece
and I can tell you it was the proudest
I've ever been in my life there's
nothing I've ever done that brought me
more Pride than that moment and I got
the first Glimpse in that moment that
maybe they could my my son would be able
to handle himself in a world with people
well that was so cool a because that
means that's so cool because there's
there was a conjunction there that was a
that was a true moral conjunction right
so first of all your husband said the
right thing so he played out his role
right second of all you listened and you
backed the hell off third your son
stepped forward right and so those
things all came together beautifully and
and that meant that you could see that
he was on his way right and there isn't
any you know and that's such a that's
such a integral element of deep human
motivation it's part of mentoring there
one of the things I loved about being a
university Professor was the opportunity
to do that with young people who weren't
my own children it's like because what
you want to do is you want to find
someone who's got some wherewithal and
provide them with the opportunity to
manifest what's next in them right and I
don't I really don't believe that there
is anything that's more satisfying than
participating in that and it makes sense
right because it is part of fostering
the maturation process and and helping
other people aim up but it's so cool
that that's not only an instinct that
can manifest itself within a family but
that can generalize to your relationship
with other people and in not being able
to be a part of that you know the great
men that I've known great women as well
but I guess I've probably seen it more
in men and maybe it's somewhat more
surprising in a way most of the Great
Men I knew I I knew who had established
remarkable careers remarkable in every
way one of the things they took Prime
pleasure in maybe at the top of the
hierarchy was Finding young people who
had ability and fostering their
development you know I have my
brother-in-law Jim Keller great engineer
as he's got older that's become a bigger
and bigger part of his life to find
really promising young people and just
to lay out opportunities for them and to
watch them grow and Thrive and my
graduate adviser Robert Peele he was
like that man I mean I went to his Fest
shrift which is a celebration of his
academic career and he had like 30 of
his students there most of whom done who
did very very well and to a man and
woman they said you know Bob did
everything he could to Foster our
careers when we worked with him and you
could see you know that was just an
endless source of delight for him and
the fact that young people don't
understand that that possibility is
sitting in front of them in relationship
to the children they might have is like
that's a cataclysmic indictment of our
culture it's so awful well they haven't
been raised to be loadbearing walls see
when we used to raise kids to be
loadbearing walls they said I can handle
it and now we've raised a generation
that doesn't think it can that has been
taught by so many experts to second
guess itself to check in to have an
adult oversee everything they do they
don't believe they can and and let me
just say you I'm I'm not someone who's
against therapy I talk about therapy
I've had in you know in in in my book
but I will say something it's very
different with you're when you're an
adult in therapy because you have the
ability to push back on a therapist you
can say to a therapist listen I think
we're blaming my mom a little too much
uh you can say to her you know I'm not
sure I I gave you the right impression
it's much harder for a child to say I
don't think it's fair to call what my
mom did abuse it's much harder for a
child to do that so there's much more
potential for it to be undermining of
the the child's sense of agency and
efficacy and Power in the world yeah
yeah well okay so something you just
said there um we haven't taught our
children to be loadbearing walls and so
a bunch of ideas ran through my head
when you said that one
was that's a matter of lack of faith
right because you actually you have to
offer the proposition that you can bear
a load before you're willing to hoist it
onto your shoulders right I mean we're
in a culture where people assume that
you need evidence at every step of the
adventure and that's
actually fundamentally that's false
because when you encounter something new
you have no evidence that you can manage
it you can you can use induction based
on your previous success and to some
degree that's relevant but induction is
famously fallible and you can assume you
can bear a load and then not right so
you can even if if you have the evidence
at hand that doesn't mean that it's
incontrovertible means you have to have
faith and you're you made you implied
that you have to have the faith that
you're loadbearing you know I've been
writing this new book called we who
wrestle with God and I'm looking at the
psychological significance of the
symbolic landscape at the base of our
culture you know and the fundamental the
fundamental presumption of our culture
is that you should bear a load that you
should and you can and you'll find your
destiny and that that's exactly what
hoisting your cross voluntarily means
right is that not only can you take a
load you can take the ultimate load and
even better than that that you find your
true calling and Destiny in your
willingness to take the ultimate load
you know and that is an optimistic
message because life is an unbearable
load and the only possible medication
for that in the final analysis is that
you're an infinitely loadbearing
creature because otherwise how can you
manage it and you might be you know and
and it seems to me the adventure
stronger yeah continually able to Bear
more yes yes right and that that's the
way to build muscle in every sense and
that couraged is to be praised right
that those are the things willing that
that are to be praised and and that's
that is what we need to be telling our
kids and I think when we were left to
when parents were more or less left to
their own devices parent family
tradition wisdom that they had from
their parents other people who had
raised good kids to adulthood that's
what we knew we remember that that you
were part of a family that your job was
to do well for others and to do the best
you could not to be praised for things
you hadn't done or things that were
frankly easy to do right and and I think
that they they grew up with a much more
sense of meaning and purpose and
ultimately even happiness than we're
seeing today all right so we've walked
through all this and you've spent a lot
of time thinking about it um you got any
ideas for a Way Forward I mean I look at
the educational system RIT large and I
think oh no it's done like it's so
corrupt the faculties of Education are
absolutely intolerably in corrupt and
they have been for 60 years and during
that time they've done nothing but
deteriorate the teachers that are being
produced by these faculties are not only
incompetent they're absolutely addled
ideologically and the universities are
are they
worse if it they's certainly no better
generally speaking and they might be
worse and so that's a damning indictment
and well you know you started looking at
one misapplication of the therapeutic
mindset embedded in this broader
ideology and then you broaden to think
oh well this is happening all sorts of
places it's like okay fair enough what
do we do about it practically speaking
you know like a return to what was it's
vague you know what I mean and it's it's
it's got that that conservative tendency
to to to offer the past as a solution
and there's something to that but where
where do you see bright lights and
possibilities moving forward absolutely
this is where I'm most optimistic it's
what parents can do it's what we've
always known how to do okay we've known
this for you know since the beginning of
Time how to raise good people and we've
done it and the way to do it in our over
with these overtreated kids is to
proceed by
subtraction remove the psych meds they
don't need the diagnosis you don't
believe in the uh over monitoring over
codling over accommodation over
avoidance of everything uh unpleasant
and give them more responsibility be the
authority in your home transmit your
values and stop allowing intermediary to
come between you and your children if
you do that you will raise good kids and
you don't have to be as afraid of the
teacher in school who doesn't share your
values because your kid is armed and you
don't have to be as terrified of social
media because your kid is ready by that
by the time you you finally allow it and
that's what I think we need to focus on
okay so you might say well why should a
parent have any faith in their own
ability given the confrontation they
have with expertise and and I say look
parents here's something you got to
understand is
that if you love someone you are going
to be as powerfully oriented as you can
and so are all your instincts in the
right direction you know like if I have
a child I genuinely love I want the best
for for them that's what love means and
that means that even if I'm not
particularly educated or maybe even not
particularly
perspicacious I am likely because of my
motivation to see the right Pathways
forward and because I care for that
child that's going to make itself
manifest to me the problem with the
bloody experts is that they don't love
your children and May and they can't you
know I mean we have a limit to the
degree to which we can shower maternal
true maternal or paternal love on other
people I mean suppose if you became a
saint like love your children right they
they don't believe in them and they
don't believe in them they see them as
weak they see them as damaged they see
them as a somewhere on a spectrum of dis
function they don't know what they can
do but parents do cuz they're with their
kids and they know what people can
handle because it's what they could
handle as kids if you could survive a
car trip without an iPod iPad your kid
can if you could survive a heartbreak
without a therapist your your C child
can too she can survive the death of a
bet without Pro uh working it through
with a
therapist all those things that we've
known that kids can you can get through
and emerge stronger on the other side
and there's all kinds of people around
including very many of our own parents
who raised good people um people who
were productive citizens other people
could rely on ask them for advice but
not the experts whose whose own you know
recommendations what what the fruits of
that are anyone's guas well we're seeing
what the fruits of it what the fruits of
of it is and and it's not good it's not
good yeah yeah
so how has writing these last two
books transformed the way that you live
your life it's it's funny they really
have especially this one this one was
much more close to home because it's
three kids I'm raising I I didn't have a
kid with a gender uh transgender
Identity or anything like that but I do
have three kids who are in this Rising
generation and um it changed me in a lot
of ways I talked to a lot of parents a
lot of psychologist a lot of
psychiatrists who are very good very
respected academic psychologists
including you and um and one of the
things I started doing was when my
9-year-old asked if she could walk home
from the bus stop alone I started
letting her even though I hated it I
hated it I still hate it but I let her
and one of the things I learned from
parents is if you curtail kids
Independence too much at some point they
stop asking they get used to the
cage they know that it's no Triumph to
walk home alone at 13 but it is at 9:00
and I started giving my kids more chores
because it was only none of my hectoring
helped make them more responsible but
when I sent them with a backpack and a
credit card to the store for me and they
had to come back with the right items
and if they didn't I sent them back they
started paying attention to getting it
right and no amount of yelling at them
had helped them pay attention to those
details before but this did and they got
to know they got to be able to talk to
people on their own other adults and
navigate things like the grocery store
on their own and that was better for
them than any number of lessons I had
given them uh summer camp was another
thing I did sleep away camp with you
know which was a no technology sleep
away camp this was phenomenal because
the opportunity to be away from my
supervision frankly was incredibly good
for them and their sense of s
self-esteem but there are other things
too extended family making sure that
even if I even if I thought extended
family didn't say the right things or
didn't give them the right food to let
it happen because you know what I don't
know what situations my kids will fall
into none of us knows but we do know
that these web of connections that they
have are very important in a stable and
healthy and happy life and even if I
don't love all the influencing Com or
all the comments made to to them or all
the jokes even if I don't deem them all
you know the most appropriate at that
stage for my kids that there's something
bigger at stake there that my kids feel
connected to a larger family and a
larger community and set of stable
connections and I let I started letting
it happen and that's what I think we
need to get back to so what what has
that done to your children's attitude
towards
you well you know so far it it's so good
I mean you know I don't think they have
any doubts that you know I'm not their
friend um but but that means they really
treasure time with actual friends they
don't rush to confide everything in me
and I think that's okay um I you know I
need to have give them that space to
even be a little defiant if they want to
or even reject some of my advice but the
most important thing is that I give them
my values that I communicate you know
we're the only culture America and I
think North America even are they there
some of the only civilizations that
don't think and in the west actually in
general we didn't do a great job at
communicating our own values to our kids
everyone else seems to know this is the
most important thing I I was at a I was
in invited to speak at a university
recently and um it was a very it was a
conservative group that had invited me
and one of the uh gentlemen who his host
said to me was joking about how his
daughter at college is a communist he
said because of course you know you send
them to college and they all become
Communists and he was sort of laughing
about that and I just thought wow we're
so comfortable in the west with the idea
that someone else will come in and
interpose their values with our own
children that should be step one is
making sure our kids share our values
not that they you know not that we
oversee everything they do or every
interaction they have but they pass on
their values so they become good and
independent and decent people and that
doesn't require expertise that's why the
mental health experts you know certainly
the therapists in general don't tell you
that but that is what actually leads to
a meaningful and good life well Abigail
that's probably a good place to stop so
let's stop when is your book coming out
now is it's available now it's available
now okay so for everybody watching and
listening you can pick up this book now
and hopefully it will
Foster your willingness to let your
children take the dangerous risks that
are necessary to imbue them with real
confidence I'll tell you something that
happened to me in Rome well I went to St
Peters you know and the peda isn't St
Peters and I think Michael Angelo carved
that when he was like 23 or something
you know some some crazy feet of utter
genius and it's very interesting that
it's in St Peter's right because well
you know that's a sacred Place obviously
a central sacred place and I spent a lot
of time thinking about the role of the
feminine in the landscape of the Sacred
you know and and our Central sacred
figure in the Christian West forever has
been some variant of the crucifix right
but the the problem with that is that
it's a male symbol and you know that's
well that begs a question like what's
the primary female symbol
of Union with God in the ultimate
sacrifice and I think Michelangelo
captured it in the pi and I think that's
why it's in St Peter's because what you
have there once you understand it it's
really something you know you could
imagine that there are two kinds of
sacrifices that you could make in the
world that are the most difficult
sacrifice and one would be to sacrifice
yourself and you might think well
there's nothing worse than that and I
would say yeah there might be
sacrificing a
child I think that most parents would
sacrifice themselves before they would
sacrifice their child and so that
implies that sacrificing your child is
worse is harder and that's what a good
mother has to do and so what you see in
the peda is this it's this terrible
image of Mary who's Larger than Life in
the representation and she's holding the
broken body of her
child in her
arms and what that means is that that's
what you have to do as a mother you have
to offer your child up to the world
that's part of the sacrificial gesture
of Eternal motherhood right and that
takes courage you know and it manifests
itself in these small decisions you know
these horrifying decisions you let your
daughter walk home when she's nine it's
like really really what if something
happens it's like right yeah that'd be
that'd be bad you'd never forgive
yourself for that right right but you
have to realize that something's going
to happen either way so either you so
shelter a child she'll never be
independent never be able to navigate
herself never know to recognize real
dangers never know how to calibrate her
response or we or you know either way
something can happen and the question is
do I want to raise a kid who's always
dependent and weak or do I want to raise
a child who's strong who can individuate
one day and I think the answer should
obviously be the latter right right well
that's the right sacrificial gesture
right yeah well so congratulations for
figuring that out very nice talking to
you again great talking to you too thank
you so much Jordan congratulations
congratulations on the birth of your
newest grandchild oh thank you very much
thank you very much yeah yeah and so all
right everyone watching and listening
thank you very much for your time and
attention I think you should rush out
and buy Abigail's new book especially if
you're a parent and you're struggling
with the necessity of being brave enough
to allow your child to place themselves
wisely in danger right CU that's life
that's for sure that's the adventure of
life so we all have to bolster ourselves
up and accept that as a necessity or
celebrate it for that matter which is a
wiser thing to do I'm going to talk to
Abigail for another half an hour as I do
with all my guests on The Daily wire
plus platform and I'm going to walk her
through well her developing interest in
the issues that she's been covering over
the last couple of years and so CU I'm
curious about that and you all might be
too and so if you want to join us on the
dailywire plus side that'd be fine that
way you can uh provide them with some
support too in their attempts to
generate another Enterprise of
communication and entertainment that uh
provides an alternative to the idiot
Legacy establishments that we happen to
be saddled with at the moment so thank
you very much Abigail thank
you
[Music]